How are things in Hammish?
Bit fresh.
Very fresh. Very fresh. Have you got snow?
No. How about
It's pretty cold, mate.
Yep.
But the people are warm.
All right, we've got one minute to go.
And it's just three of us. It's not ideal.
I'm talking in a vacuum. It's on mute. Alright, excellent.
Kiata Hona, Kiata, pene. Good to have everyone here.
Um, we have Lvna Edwards ready for us.
She is our first presenter, so she will join us now.
Dr. Alvin Edwards. Welcome to the Health Committee.
I'm Sam Dale. Uh, it's very good to have you here.
Uh, we have you here for five minutes
to give your submission on the medicines bill.
Medicines amendment. Bill. I will
pass that time over to you.
Now,
Not a medical doctor, by the way, nor
I stand in strong opposition for this bill.
The bill that presents itself as a tool
for improving access,
but in reality advances foreign pharmaceutical
interests while sidelining Maori Wright Health equity.
And Ori, let's be honest,
this bill doesn't just forget, it, deliberately erases it.
No shared governance, no obligation to consult hapu, iwi
or Maori health leaders.
It is le legislative equivalent of saying,
we'll take it from here while pushing Maori to the margins.
Again, the so-called,
so-called verification pathway is equally alarming.
Fast tracking medicines based on approval from overseas
jurisdictions with no cultural context, no Maori safe land,
and no local scrutiny.
It's not innovative, it's negligence.
It outsources our regulatory responsibility
and imports risk directly into Maori bodies,
uh, where the harm will land first in the hardest.
And we come to the expanded prescriber powers,
more prescription, fewer checks,
and still no cultural safety requirements, no training,
and no understanding of whanau centered models.
So what we're doing is giving more tools to a system
that already are failing Maori, but now with less oversight.
Um, and while the bill talks about modernizing
medicines classification committee,
there's no guaranteed Maori representation.
No ua, no MAGA Maori modification
and name only all gloss, no substance.
So this is, this is what equity would look like.
Real co-governance.
And then embedded at every level
mandatory Copa Maori health training for prescribers.
Maori led evaluation of medicines including ua,
rejection of foreign verification loopholes,
guaranteed Maori decision making rolled
with equal authority.
Let's be clear, this bill isn't about access.
It's about control. Control over who decides who benefits
and who who gets ignored, gets ignored.
And it's Maori who are once again, being asked
to trust the system has repetitively failed
us, is not optional.
It's not a suggestion, it's a constitutional promise.
This bill, as it stands, break that promise, withdraw it,
rethink it, rewrite it,
and this time with Marty at the table, not on the menu.
Kia. Kia,
Thank you very much, uh, for your submission.
We've got two minutes left.
Uh, are there any questions
that do not appear to be any? So, uh,
Okay. Can I just finish
by saying Yeah, of course you can much.
Thank you, Sam.
Can I just say that
whenever I've seen anything as a coalition agreement
and David Seymour is leading it,
I actually am very mistrusting
because Mario raised from this piece of legislation.
We have to do better. Okay, thank you.
Ok. Do I
Alright, we now move on to our next presenter, which is
Jacob Sorenson.
We don't have the next submitter actually.
So we'll move to SOR Group Limited.
And from SOR Group Limited, we have Greg Marshall.
Greg is joining us at the moment.
We just spoke for that to come through. Excellent.
Greg, we have you now, we have you here for 10 minutes.
Welcome to the health committee.
Uh, you can use that time as you wish.
If you wanna leave us time for questions, you may.
I'll hand that to you now. Thank you.
Hi everyone. Um, thank you very much for, um,
uh, having me here today.
I, uh, appre, um, really appreciate it.
Um, look, you've all seen my briefs
and so I'm not gonna, I'm not here
to repeat every single detail, but let me be very clear.
We are dispensing medicines in New Zealand without any
systematic testing to ensure their safety.
That's a critical gap.
One that harms patients disproportionately affects Maori
and rural communities,
and leaves us exposed to global supply chain failures.
The good news is, it's fixable.
Today I'm gonna outline three practical amendments
to this bill that will deliver safe, faster,
and more equitable access to medicines,
while also laying the foundation
for a resilient domestic supply chain.
Over the next 10 minutes, we're gonna walk through the, uh,
crisis on our medicine systems.
The real world harm, it causes the key flaws in this bill
as drafted in three targeted amendments.
First up is a rule of two pathway
for faster evidence-based approvals.
Number two is a, a national batch testing
and surveillance system to protect patients
and enable local manufacturing
and emergency access reforms to save lives
and support frontline clinicians.
We've got a hidden crisis.
We, we just don't test our medicines.
New Zealand does not have,
has no active medicine quality surveillance.
We don't know if a medicine's real or fake.
Is the dose correct? Is it contaminated?
Has it degraded in transport?
The reality is, if a medicine is fake, contaminated
or the wrong strength, we only discover this
after patients are harmed
and they tell their doctor, we're dispensing medicines
and using medicines blindly.
This affects every patient, every day that
that harms happening right now.
I mean, the, the delays in poor quality are costing lives.
Um, you, you would've, you've been presented evidence
around now, um, monkeypox the way the vaccine was delayed.
Um, the drug foundation has drawn your attention
to the 160 overdose deaths we have every year
because Naloxone hasn't been able
to be put through the system.
Uh, our cancer treatments are a,
a fraction of our peer group.
Um, if we use Germany as the, as the gold standard and, and,
and say they have a hundred percent of the cancer medicines,
we're sitting in about 35% of Germany, our peer group,
which is Australia, uh, the UK
and Canada, they sit at around 80% of German approvals.
We're at 35%. We are so far out of the game.
It's, uh, embarrassing.
So as we turn to this f um, the bill in front of you, um,
it has false promises and it has no safety infrastructure.
The first floor is automatic approval isn't automatic.
The 30 day clock pauses things indefinitely.
There's no emergency pathway for medicines like,
like naloxone.
We have stricter than Australia manufacturing GMP
for no safety benefit.
And we still have no medicine quality testing planned.
These are just barriers to, to trying to bring the intent
of this bill to life.
So what do we need to do? We need real automatic approval.
Fast track. A real rule of two that can't be paused,
can't be timed out by, by meds safe.
We need emergency use approval for, um, products that are,
are needed by emergency responders.
And we need to do that with a safety net.
We need to have a 24 month close active surveillance
with batch testing of all these medicines.
So we, uh, aligned with emergency stock powers
so we can stop harm once we
discover it through the batch testing.
This would deliver on the coalition's actual promise
at automatic approval based on global
science solution.
Number two, we need to build a medicine surveillance system.
We need batch testing for medicines used at scale.
We need real time contamination alerts.
We need active surveillance
beyond hoping doctors notice problems.
We literally need people walking around,
picking stuff off shelves,
taking it in and getting it tested.
Um, the TGA do it, everyone else, our peer group does it.
We need to have effective testing.
The implementation for this isn't hard.
It's all here already.
Um, we can, we have, uh,
we can use existing laboratory infrastructure.
There's enough, um, high quality labs in New Zealand.
Um, we can fund through a very, very modest levy
and we can integrate that with the med safe systems
and we'd end up not dispensing medicines we'd never trusted.
I mean, the lack of testing infrastructure
is an infrastructure gap that affects every patient
and is a good 40 years overdue.
Um, section 29 obviously needs, um, some work both
to expand, um, uh, the prescribers, um,
and, uh, remove the name patient barriers
and particularly, um, expand prescriber access.
But it needs mandatory quality testing
for products at scale use.
We want everything. Uh,
we're in a situation when FAC is funding medicines at scale
and we don't know what they are.
We don't test it. We don't test.
We, we just take it on as as written
by someone else somewhere else in the world.
This is to change these things and give people like St.
John access to alternative medicines.
I I, I think you might remember that they referred to
that they were down to their, uh, their last, um, piece
of supply of ketamine, which they need to use.
And they, whilst they have an alternative,
they they can't access it.
They can't use it legally.
So where we are, we, you know, you guys
have got a choice here.
You can either pretty much go with a status quo
by using the bill as drafted
or be it with a, a slight, um, expansion
of prescribers.
You know. So basically we continue the current system.
We have, we dispense medicines we never test.
We have a broken promise on automatic approval.
We have 160 preventable overdose deaths annually.
And marry inequality will be perpetuated
the reform paths in front of you.
We need to put in a medicines quality surveillance
'cause it protects all patients.
We need true automatic approval 'cause it saves lives.
We need a transparent, accountable system.
This choice is stark and really urgent.
So I, I think the evidence is clear.
Um, and, um, sorry, as I through this,
so, um, it, I believe it's time for you guys to act.
Um, and I'll wrap it up now
and give you some time for some, um, questions.
Um, thanks everyone, um, both
for your time and your attention.
Um, I, I, I would like to commend the, the coalition
for advancing the Medicines Amendment bill
that provides a strong foundation
for real meaningful reform.
This committee now has a unique opportunity
to close a dangerous blind spot in our medicine system.
Today in New Zealand, we're dispensing unapproved
and substitute medicines often at scale without testing,
tracking, or accountability.
That's not safe, it's not transparent,
and it's not sustainable.
It harms patients.
Disproportionate dis proportionately affects Maori rural
communities and leaves us dangerously exposed
to global supply chain failures.
The three amendments are proposed to practical, affordable,
and directly aligned with government goals.
They deliver on the promise rule of two,
enabling faster access to safe and trusted medicines.
They ensure every medicine, local
or imported is subject to independent batch testing,
which lays the foundation
for a resilient domestic therapeutic sector.
And, and importantly, um, any future
regulatory, uh, framework.
And they provide equitable emergency access saving lives in
rural ma Maori and underserved communities.
These reforms will save lives, they'll restore confidence
and they'll leave our health
systems stronger than when we found it.
Thank you. Um, any questions?
No, thank you very much, Greg.
Um, we've got about a minute for questions.
Are there any there? No,
Greg, thank you very much for your thorough submission.
It's greatly appreciated.
Um, I, I wanna make sure everyone, um, uh, as, as,
as truly aware how, um, uh, incredibly easy
and, uh, low cost putting in batch testing is, um,
it's, uh, um, we could, uh,
set up all the, uh, all the labs are already set up
with secure digital feeds.
Um, we could take the data straight from the labs almost
instantly and take it through into a, um, into a, um,
a central database.
This could happen in weeks
and cost, uh, um, tens of thousands of dollars.
Uh, it seems a small price to ensure
that New Zealanders are kept safe.
I look forward to you guys, uh, consideration and
and and moving forward. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Greg for outlining that. Thank you.
Got it.
Okay. Um, do we have Jacob back?
No, we Don't. We don't. Okay.
We'll move on to, um, next,
so I can see if she's already there.
Sorry. Um, fa Sobi from the Breast Cancer Art Coalition.
Faye, welcome to the health committee.
Where is she? I saw her before.
Yes, I'm here. Oh, you are. You're right there.
Great.
Koto. My name is sbi.
I'm Secretary of Breast Cancer, a coalition,
a patient based incorporated society in registered charity.
We aim to make best practice detection, treatment
and care accessible to all affected
by breast cancer in New Zealand.
We provide support, treatment,
and care, uh, sorry.
We provide support and information
and a voice for those who have experienced breast cancer.
BCAC has over 30 member groups throughout New Zealand,
and a number of these are representative on our committee.
We support the intent of the medicines amendment bill,
which aims to improve access to medicines in New Zealand
by enabling medisafe to approve medicines already approved
and two recognized international jurisdictions
through a streamlined verification pathway
to assist the committee to better understand the benefit
and implications of this proposed change.
We provided the committee an opportunity
to evaluate the proposed amendment
against a solid tumor landscape being breast cancer.
Our evaluation has shown
that 13 breast cancer medicines on breast cancer regimens
are registered in two other jurisdictions.
12 of the 13 are registered in two recognized jurisdictions.
When I did the submission, it was actually liver
but in, um, which has an active bed safe application
and is the only one that does, uh,
is now registered in the US and Europe.
Previously it was registered in the US
and China Europe in fact published their registration.
In May. We have also queried if there are instances
where a stakeholder other than a pharmaceutical company
may trigger registration.
We are hopeful that pharmaceutical
companies will prioritize the supply of medicines
to the New Zealand market alongside other competing market
opportunities if the bill passes into law.
And we're also hopeful that global decision makers will view
New Zealand radically market with less caution
and pharmaceutical companies will choose to put more time,
effort, and resources to towards New Zealand
if pharma approves improves its reputation for slow,
non-transparent and difficult funding approvals.
However, streamlining NetSafe process to expedite access
to life saving breast cancer medicines has two
key dependencies.
We highlight the critical role of pharmaceutical
companies in applying for registration funding.
The low number of active registrations
and breast cancer medicines is evidence of a level
of reluctance to initiate medicine registrations.
Pharmac X processes
with funding delays deter companies from bringing medicines
to New Zealand, preventing or delaying access to medicines.
We provided evidence that advanced breast cancer
patients in New Zealand face worse survival outcomes
of 18 months on the median, uh, compared
to comparable countries where it is double
that at 32 plus months.
Largely this is due to slow access to modern therapies.
New Zealand funds only 17% of model medicines,
which is 0.4% of our GDP compared to the OECD average
of 1.4%.
That level is needed to improve access.
In conclusion, we support the Medicine Amendment bill
to truly accelerate access to medicines
PX processes must be streamlined and its funding increased.
I'm happy to take questions.
Excellent. Thank you very much. Uh, we see Dr.
Vel has a question and then Jenny Markoff.
Thanks Mr. Chair.
And thank you Faye for your, um, very well set out, uh, uh,
in persuasively argued submission.
Um, I wanted to take you up on your proposal
and your submission that where access has been granted
by two recognized jurisdictions,
other stakeholders should be able to in initiate the,
uh, registration.
And I, we've heard about that from some
of the pharmaceutical firm representatives
and their concern that that will mean
that they are not sponsoring their medicine when it is being
used in New Zealand and there could be instances
of parallel importing, uh, occurring, uh, which
of course would damage their interests.
So can you tell me how you weigh up that, that issue and,
and why you support the ability for stakeholders to do it?
I, I won't name a medicine,
but there is a medicine which is sitting, um, unregistered
for breast cancer is currently registered
for two other solid tumors.
I think the first of those was back in 2012.
It's not a new medicine. Um, in breast cancer.
We're very, very keen
that in fact it'd be registered and it'd be funded.
Um, but we continue to wait for registration
and without registration it's not considered
for funding for funding.
So for funding of medicines in New Zealand, both
breast special interest group
and breast cancer are to Aurora coalition jointly
seek applications for funding of medicines.
And there are instances which are not the ones you are
describing earlier, I think,
where in fact there would be opportunity
to access a medicine which is already been used in
New Zealand and being supplied in New Zealand.
Another instance possibly that I could use,
and I will name the medicine here is N HER two or TDX D.
We have subgroups of that medicine.
Um, so it's not just for a particular subtype.
There are now subgroups
and they are her two positive, HER two low
and HER two ultra low.
The pharmaceutical company was quick to register, um,
for HER two positive.
It subsequently followed up for HER two low.
We now have funding for HER two positive we're awaiting, uh,
to find out whether in fact a recent tct a C meeting.
We'll agree to funding of HER two low.
However, there is also HER two ultra low.
Each of these medicines has had to go
through the same med safe process,
which on average takes a year to 18 months.
So we're looking at four years across those three subsets.
And for a medicine like that,
which is a breakthrough medicine, it doesn't seem efficient.
There are other examples.
I think I use the example of, um, Olaparib,
uh, which is targeted or indicated for BRCA one and two.
There are other, um, germline factors such
as PAL B two
and also somatic, um, where in fact you could,
you would have to go through again exactly the same process.
And those would be the instances I could see.
And pharma companies certainly don't apply
for every medicine to pharma
and we see similar situation with med.
Thank you Jenny. Uh, thank you Faye.
Really good submission. Uh, appreciate it.
Um, once the Farm Act processes, uh, speed it up
and there's that, uh, more direct pathway,
how much is the funding part of the equation
that you referred to?
Just sort of in your closing remarks.
Um, part of the problem of getting these medicines out
to patients and your,
As I've said, it is a critical dependency.
There are two sides to it.
One, one is the processes because the capability
and capacity within pharma we understand
is not enough to look at any solid tumor type
other than two medicines every year.
And if you look at the backlog of medicines
and you look at the cascade of medicines coming towards us,
there is a desperate need to actually do
what we're doing here
and simplify the processes within Farm Act to speed that up.
And yes, in addition funding,
but I would like to put the focus in the first instance
on reforming the processes while people consider
and take time to really think about funding
and the difference that that would make in New Zealand.
Thank you. Thank you.
Are there any further
questions, Dr. Vera?
Um, but I just want to confirm your answer to me earlier.
'cause it was, I think very helpful for the committee.
And if I just try
to summarize it in a straightforward way as I can.
There are medicines in New Zealand that are registered
for particular, some indications, but not others, uh,
because they're funded for some, uh,
indications and not others.
And allowing automatic verification of the, um,
medicine for those other indications
where it's approved from that overseas CS would,
um, help get the medicine, um, approved,
but without running into the problems of parallel importing
and not having a sponsor
that the pharmaceutical industry raised.
Thank you very much. Thank
You.
Thank you very much. Thank you Faye.
Thank you for the opportunity.
It's an excellent submission. Thank you.
Alright, we have a slight
buffer here, but, um, Clarks, do we have the Law Association
of New Zealand or Yes, we do.
They're ready to go. Ready to go. Fantastic.
Welcome to the Law Association.
Uh, we have Kate McKay mackay, uh, joining us here.
Welcome Kate. Uh, we've got you for 10 minutes.
Uh, you can use that time as you wish or,
or save us some time for questions at the end.
I'll hand that to you now. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you so much. Yes.
Um, as you said, my name is Kate mackay
and I'm speaking today on behalf
of the Law Association's Mental Health
and Disability Law Committee.
Uh, the Law Association is an independent membership
organization for the New Zealand legal profession.
And, uh, we are one of the many expert law committees here.
Uh, our work, we liaise closely with a range
of stakeholders, uh, in the field.
And, uh, our work involves proning disability awareness
and pursuing law and policy reform through a range
of initiatives just like this, this submission today,
which I'll be speaking to.
So as you would've read in our submission, uh,
we broadly support the bill
and its aim to promote access to medication in New Zealand.
But we have several key concerns
that we've outlined in our submissions
and I will go over today.
Uh, we think the bill has some good ideas
and it's a great start, but there are several key
improvements that can be made to it
to make it all the better, and especially will help, uh,
these, these key issues that we hope, uh,
our submissions will address,
will help in particular the people
with mental health conditions and disabilities.
Uh, so firstly, I'll speak to, uh,
the clause seven of the bill,
which inserts the new section 22 C, uh,
about the director General's health assessment, uh,
DI director General of Health, sorry, his, uh,
their assessment of New Zealand specific health risks.
So we think it's great that
medicines can hopefully make their way
to patients faster in New Zealand,
but we want to make sure that particular, uh,
New Zealand specific concerns aren't overlooked.
Uh, this is particularly so
because, uh, the list of countries that, uh,
the bill will look to, uh,
and fast tracking medicine approval,
they don't have the same, uh,
demographic makeup as New Zealand.
Uh, this includes our larger body and Pacific populations,
and we know that these populations, uh, are more at risk
for mental health conditions and disabilities.
So we want to make sure that they're given
adequate consideration, uh, in these,
this fast track new verification pathway.
And we think that the bill should be strengthened in
that aspect, uh, such as having robust criteria to make sure
that they are not overlooked in this approval process.
Um, next I'll speak to the, uh,
public funding aspect.
Uh, we think it's great again,
that medicines can make their way faster into New Zealand
and into the hands of patients,
but we want to make sure that they are affordable
and accessible and that it's not simply a matter
of getting the medicines faster, uh, into New Zealand,
but making sure that they arrive, uh, in affordable way,
in an equitable way, so that we are not creating a system
of haves and have-nots with this bill.
Uh, that you can only access these fast, uh, more faster
approved medications if you can afford it.
So we want to make sure
that the bill clearly outlines a process
for if pharm act will be matching the speed to,
uh, see if they'll receive public funding.
And the same with unapproved medicines
and the new, uh, provision
for nurse practitioners to prescribe these.
And this is particularly so
because we know that, uh, those
with mental health conditions
and disabilities are more likely to be
of a lower socioeconomic status.
Okay, we also want to touch on the
recognized regulatory authorities.
So they're outlined in the new Clause seven inserting
Section 22 A.
Uh, it's great.
These are approved countries look great,
but we want to make sure that in the bill it clearly
outlines a process for approving new countries,
recognized regulatory authorities
and removing them if necessary.
Um, a key example of this is the us.
They are listed as a regulatory,
a recognized regulatory authority.
And, uh, currently their policies on people
with disabilities, uh, in their healthcare sector
is not great, is currently not aligning with, uh,
New Zealand policy, well, what we would consider our values
for fair, equitable access to healthcare.
Um, for example, the White House, uh, has really suppressed,
uh, statement talking, looking into the prevalence
of the Fre Post by prescribing common mental health
medications such as SSRI, antidepressants, anti-psychotics,
and mood stabilizers.
Uh, the Health Secretary Robert F. Kennedy has also, uh,
made several derogatory comments about autistic people
and several concerning comments about A
DHD similar medication.
So while this hasn't quite affected global policy yet,
thankfully, we wanna make sure that it doesn't get to
that point, and we want to make sure
that New Zealand is protected, uh,
through this bill from any
global changes in on medications.
Uh, I'll now talk about expanded prescribing rights.
So the bill now allows for, uh,
pharmacists and other non-medical prescribers, uh,
to prescribe swaps of medications
and instances of stock shortages.
We think this is great, but we want to make sure that
patients are still getting the same quality of care
that they would from their normal GP or medical provider.
Uh, we know that pharmacists are currently swamped, uh,
under resourced,
and we want to make sure that patients have the same quality
and depth of care from a pharmacist.
Uh, another example of this has been a recent study out
of Otago, uh, about the issues
that refugees face in New Zealand.
Uh, we know that they are more likely to
have mental health conditions and disabilities,
and they can have communication issues with pharmacists.
And there are interpreter services available in gps,
but not at pharmacists.
So we wanna make sure that patients are still getting the
same quality of care and depth of care
with this new, uh, amendment.
Uh, finally before I go to questions, uh, we also just want
to submit on the fact that this bill doesn't address a range
of barriers faced by especially people
with mental health conditions
and disabilities that prevent them from
accessing medications.
These are costs, uh, what seems
to many people like relatively small co-payments can be, uh,
massive barriers, uh, accumulative accumulating over time,
uh, taking time off work to get to the pharmacy, get
to the gp living rurally, uh,
and other issues that this bill simply does not address.
And have several flow on effects to healthcare
and costs, uh, of providing that.
Such as, uh, one study found
that reducing the copayments could potentially save
$32.4 million a year and reduce hospitalizations.
So we think this bill is a great start, uh,
but there are so much more to improving access
to medication than speeding up access and cutting red date.
And we think that this bill could do so much more
for vulnerable communities such
as those into health conditions and disabilities.
Thank you. Thank you Kate.
Uh, Isha, is your hand still up from
before? Yeah. Do you have a question?
I, I've got a question if that's alright.
Go for it. Yeah. Um,
thank you for your submission.
Uh, I wanted to ask about the
recognized regulatory authorities proposal.
Uh, are you suggesting that the bill should contain criteria
for what regulation, what types
of regulatory authorities should be approved?
Uh, and if so, um, what do you think those should be?
Yeah, that's a good question.
I think it would be great to have criteria in the bill so
that it's outlined, uh, clearly
and, uh, provides a robust set of what we value
as New Zealanders and our healthcare
and what we want from our medicines policy.
Uh, I think
that would be valuable in both appro new countries
and in what criteria would lend a country more to,
uh, removing them from the list if they kind of, uh,
go stray further away from
what the core values are in New Zealand.
Thank you.
Oh, sorry.
Thank you. Uh, are there any other questions from members?
All right. Hey, Kate, thank you very much for, for
that thorough submission, um,
and for a few, uh, clear points there
that we can take away and consider further.
I do appreciate it. Thank
You. Thank you for your time.
Thank you. Okay.
Uh, next up we have, uh, Merck Sharp and Dome.
Thanks. Available. Excellent.
Welcome to the health committee, everybody. I'm Sam. Ow.
Uh, we've got members there in front of us.
You'll see on your screen, uh, we have you for 10 minutes.
If you wanna save us time for questions, you may,
but I'll hand that time to you now. Thank you.
Fantastic. Thank you.
I think one of my colleagues, Rocky, is also joining,
but I might just start with the statement while she joins.
I'm here, Jackson. Oh, great. Hi, Rocky. Okay.
Uh, good afternoon Esteem members of the Health Committee.
My name is Jackson Busay
and I represent Merck Sharpen Dome New Zealand, a company
that has proudly operated in New Zealand for over 60 years.
Our focus has always been on clinical research
and the supply of essential medicines
and vaccines across various therapeutic areas,
including oncology and infectious diseases.
I'm also joined by my colleague Rocky Gokul from our
regulatory affairs team, who will be able
to assist in answering any questions the committee may
have today.
I wanted to start by saying we welcome the Medicines
Amendment bill and efforts
to improve regulatory processes in New Zealand
to ultimately support better patient access.
I also want to note at the outset our strong support
for the submission made by Medicines New Zealand.
While our submission to the committee contains several
recommendations today, I will focus on four key points
that we believe are essential in improving the
healthcare landscape in New Zealand.
First verification pathways.
We have concerns regarding the requirement for new medicines
to obtain full marketing authorization from two
or more regulatory authorities.
This process could delay access to new treatments
for patients who need them.
We recommend that approval from just one recognized
authority be sufficient, similar
to the streamlined process in Singapore.
Additionally, we urge the committee
to expand the verification pathway to include updates such
as new indications, formulations, and dosing instructions.
Second, legislative timeframes.
We advocate for the introduction of legislative
and predictable timeframes
for regulatory review akin to those in Australia.
This would provide much needed certainty
for both sponsors and patients.
Presently. Evaluations
for new medicines in New Zealand take far longer than they
do in comparable jurisdictions.
Establishing clear timelines would enhance the efficiency
of the approval process.
Third, technological advancements we call for the adoption
of the electronic common technical document
or ECTD platform to modernize the submission process.
Currently New Zealand relies on an outdated system
that does not meet global standards.
Implementing the ECTD would not only improve efficiency,
but also align processes with international best practices.
Finally, the impact on the reimbursement process.
We are deeply concerned about the existing bottlenecks in
the reimbursement process, which could worsen with an influx
of newly registered medicines.
Currently over 450 applications
of pending funding in the Phar Act system, according
to the medicine's landscape 20 24 25 report
by medicine's New Zealand.
New Zealand ranks the lowest
among OECD countries in the percentage
of new medicines reimbursed with only 7% listed compared
to an OECD average of 29%.
Without improvements in reimbursement timelines,
it will become increasingly difficult for sponsors
to justify registering products in New Zealand,
ultimately risking patient access to new therapies.
While we welcome efforts to improve regulatory processes
through this bill, it is our view
that commensurate improvements must be made
to the reimbursement process if the end goal
of improving patient access
to the medicines they need is to be achieved.
In conclusion, we urge the committee
to consider these recommendations.
Thank you for your time and I
look forward to your questions.
Excellent. Excellent. Thank you.
And good to, um, good to hear submission.
We've got plenty of time for questions that's positive.
I've go to Cameron Luxton and Ben Dr. Vel.
Oh, thank you Mr. Chairman.
Um, yeah, I just did a question quickly about,
you mentioned the, the one path verification method
like they have in Singapore.
I believe it's, they still have to be recognized by two, uh,
overseas authorities, but they only need
the documentation from one.
Is that what you were referring to?
Yes, that's, I'll take that. Jackson. Yes, that's correct.
Um, we, we, we are aware that they have a primary
reference regulator and then a secondary one,
but they only require the, uh, assessment reports
from, uh, the primary.
Okay, thank you. And if, if I may, uh,
ask you just a supplementary on it, um, the, the Australian,
uh, model, do they reference any overseas, uh,
verifications like Singapore do in regards
to their timeline restrictions?
So how does that interplay?
Does that help them reach their timeline
or is that, uh, their restriction on how long it can take?
Or is there another list? Are you,
Sorry, are you requesting for Singapore?
No, for Australia, do they use the simple scheme to
what Singapore do in regards
to only needing verification from one
or do they need it from multiple?
Australia doesn't have that.
They review everything in on their own merit
and also they have legislated timelines, so they have
to stick to those timelines.
It's in, in the act.
Thank you. Alright, Asha, then Jenny
Is the, um, proposal you make about electronic common
document, uh, are there any legislative barriers
to medisafe adopting that?
Or is it merely the cost of changing their processes?
My under, yeah,
my understanding there's no barriers from a
legislative standpoint.
It's more a resourcing issue.
Yeah, Sure.
Thank you. Uh, can I just have a sub on the,
um, timeframes?
Um, you mentioned being likened to Australia
and it's in in their act.
Yes. What, what are the, can you explain their
timelines? What, what does that look like?
Yes, sure.
So, uh, it's section 90 of the Therapeutic Goods Act.
Um, they have, uh, 255 working days to review,
uh, an application.
So this is a new medicine
or a new vaccine, uh, registration application.
And if they do not meet that timeline,
there's actually another section in the app, section 24, um,
which, um, which says that they need
to refund 25% of the evaluation fee back to the sponsor.
Okay. So there's a penalty.
Can I have another question if no one else
has? Do we have time, Mr.
Jenny? Yes, we do. Thank you.
Just, um, you,
you mentioned the reimbursement process needs improvement.
Can you describe what that would look like, please?
Yeah, I guess it's probably twofold.
I think one of the key issues when it comes
to medicine's access in New Zealand is
that traditionally p has had a capped budget
and we probably haven't seen sufficient funding go towards
allowing those p assess medicines to become available
to patients publicly.
I think that's the key issue.
We obviously welcome the budget uplift to p
last year from the government.
However, we would note that
because there's such a historic backlog, we continue
to see challenges when it comes to medicines access.
The other point I would make about HCA processes in
New Zealand is,
and this is being fleshed out in a somewhat recent review
of the Phar Act processes, there's less predictability
in timeframes and less transparency in the process.
If you compared it to Australia's system, for example,
there are prescribed timeframes
and cycles in which medicines will be assessed.
However, our, in our experience,
oftentimes you can put in a submission to Phar act
and it goes into somewhat of a black box.
So I think improving predictability, transparency,
and prescribed processes would also assist
All. Hey,
thank you.
Thank you Jackson and Raki for your presentation today
and for joining the committee.
We greatly appreciate it. Thank you. Thank
You very much for your time.
Thank you. Bye-bye.
Alright, we now move on.
Do we, are we in a position to move on, Julian,
or are we, are we good to, to wait?
Yes. Yes. We have the Cancer Society of New Zealand.
Fantastic. Okay. So that's Dr.
Kate Gregory and, uh, Rachel Newman joining us.
We have them online. Uh, welcome to you both.
I'm Sam Dale, chair of the Health Committee.
Um, we've got you for 10 minutes.
I'll leave that time with you if you are, leave us time
for questions you may have, but, uh, I'll give
that time to starting now. Thank you.
Thank you. Um, I'm Kate Gregory. I'm the medical
Director of the Cancer Society,
and I work
as a medical oncologist in the Nelson Tasman region.
Um, I'm speaking today really in my role
as medical director.
Um, we are really, um, a very supportive of the, um, bill
as it stands, particularly the, um,
the clause in the bill to improve access
through international verification.
This really makes perfect sense to us.
If, um, there's reputable data from overseas,
it obviously makes sense to utilize that.
And any way in which our patients can get earlier access
to treatments, um, makes a massive difference in terms
of patients' quality of life and their,
and improved survival and outcomes from their cancer.
Um, I witness on a daily basis in my role as an oncologist,
the distress that patients experience when they're aware
that there are medicines overseas that are effective.
They're all on Facebook groups and they're in chat rooms.
They know what's available overseas.
And anything that can be done that means
that we're getting access to these treatments earlier, um,
is hugely to be welcomed.
Um, in terms of the other guess, I guess the other thing,
it's not just getting the
medicines approved, it's getting them funded.
And that's another thing. And I know that
that's another step along the way.
We've had a huge, um, amount
of new cancer medicines funded recently,
but things are changing all the time
and we still lag behind, um, in
what would be considered international standard
of care in many tumor types in this country, even with
that recent influx of new drugs.
So that's the other aspect I guess
that needs to be considered.
But we do consider
that using international data is a
really positive step forward.
Did you wish to ask me a question now?
You can, you can keep going
and then I can keep going. Okay.
Okay. I'll keep going. Um, in terms of the, um,
the other part of the billing and looking at, um,
increased flexibility for, uh, prescribing,
I think we would also welcome that.
I think that we see increasingly,
I see it in my day-to-day work that patients struggle
to have access to their gps, particularly in certain areas
that I, um, where I look
after patients, certainly in rural areas.
And I think making this prescribing more flexible be really
beneficial for patients.
Um, it will mean
that they get the changes in the
medic medicines that need quickly.
Um, and it's, you know,
be very helpful for continuity of care.
I get a lot of calls from patients
who can't get into the see the GPS and needing scripts done.
So if there's more availability for that, um, locally, then
that would be really to be welcomed.
I think. Um, though I do think there still needs
to be increased, um, investment in the oncology workforce.
I know this is not just an, uh, an oncology,
I know a cancer bill,
but, um, you know, we need to keep investing.
We need to make sure
that we are not just relying on other specialists to cover
for the deficiencies in the workforce.
So those are really the points that we wish to make.
I'm really happy to take, ask, answer any questions
that you, anybody may have.
Excellent. Thank you very much. Uh, Dr. Kate?
Yes, we have Dr. Vera with a question of hand up.
Thanks very much, Mr.
Chair, and if the committee will
forgive me, I have two questions.
Um, I can see,
and they relate to the two different ways this, um,
bill might help access approved medicines.
The first is because you, as you note, there's a, um,
the funding decision is separate from the approval decision.
The first is we might have more approved
but not funded medicines.
Uh, can you please explain to me how that might improve?
Uh, do you think that'll improve the safety
if not the access?
Uh, for, for patients?
I mean I, you know, I think it will improve the safety.
Unfortunately, you are right, it won't improve the access.
And the problem with cancer medicines is
that they're phenomenally expensive.
So even if a medicine comes in
and it's not approved, it's not like some
of the medications which possibly patients can afford,
like 100 or $200 a month.
You know, with some of the new breast cancer drugs,
we're talking about sort of $19,000 every six weeks
and not many patients can afford that.
Um, but I think if,
at least if the drugs are available here,
patients aren't having to then import 'em from overseas,
which is what has happened.
Um, I've had patients who've flown overseas
to get medicines overseas
and bring them back into the country.
Um, I had patient who, um,
back in the day she had metastatic breast cancer
and she used to fly to Indonesia once every three weeks
to get her medicines from there.
So I think that would be a, a big change
that would be an improvement.
But, um, just
because of the cost of a lot of these drugs,
it would still be prohibitive for a lot of people.
Even if they were approved in this country,
they still wouldn't be able to access them.
And thank, thank you.
And my, um, second question is, um, there's a
suggestion that the fact that it's easier to get through,
um, approval under this bill might mean
that there's greater incentives for pharmaceutical companies
to, uh, support their pro, um, uh, products to be approved
by this, uh, pathway, uh,
even absent any change in the funding circumstances from
from p Now that to me seems unlikely.
And I wondered what your honest assessment of, you know, uh,
how impactful this will be, um, for how much
of an inducement the bill will be for a pharmaceutical firm
to put up there, uh, medicine even when there's no signal
of change funding from farming.
Yeah, I think that's, I think
that's a really good question.
Um, and I know from talking
to pharmaceutical companies over the years that, um,
often they kind of think there's no point in pushing this
into New Zealand because, you know, the, the effort
to actually do all the paperwork
and everything is then the, you know, the remote possibility
that the drug may get funded.
I think that recently things have changed
because there have been all these approvals
and I think possibly pharmaceutical companies would feel
more optimistic about, um,
drugs ultimately getting funded in this country.
Um, so I think possibly that, you know, hopefully
that might make a difference, um,
because they might see, you know, be more, you know,
be more positive that there might
be a good outcome for them.
Um, so maybe I understand the question
and I understand, um, the point you're making,
but I think possibly the, at the,
the environment has changed a bit.
Thank you.
I've gone on mute. Back off mute. Hey, so thank you.
Uh, are there any more questions for members from members?
No. In lieu of that, um, Kate, Rachel, thank you very much
for joining us and for making a submission to the committee
And thank you. Just would like
to thank, thank you
for the opportunity to present today.
Thank you.
Thank you. Thank you. Alright, we're um,
we're a long way ahead of schedule actually, so, um,
well are gonna take, give you a cup of tea.
We're gonna take a 10 minute break, so we'll try
and we'll be back here if we can be back here by two please
and then we'll, we'll try get suspended until then, thank
everyone's back.
Excellent. Okay. Um,
so next up we have Mark Baldwin.
Do we have Mark, or if we don't,
then we can promote um, Kate from the College of Nurses
up there incorporated.
Kate is joining us now.
Hello Kate, great to have you here.
Welcome to the Health Committee.
I'm Sam Dale, you've said other members, uh,
on the screen in front of you,
we have you here for 10 minutes.
You may use that or save us some time
for questions if you wish,
but I will hand that time to you now.
Thank you.
Well thank you.
The College of Nurses and I'm the
Executive Director of the College of Nurses.
Thank you for the opportunity to make the submission, um,
to this select committee today in response
to the medicines amendment bill, the College
of Nurses RA is a professional association,
which is a leading voice for support advancement in valuing
of the nursing profession, representing our membership
of registered nurses and a growing number
of nurse practitioners.
There are now over 900 nationally
and it is a group that is growing rapidly.
Nurse practitioners MPNZ is a division of the college
representing nurse practitioners professional
and practice issues nurse practitioners, PUI.
We cover, um, work autonomously
and in collaborative teams with other health professionals
to promote health, prevent disease,
and improve health outcomes.
Nurse practitioners assess, diagnose
and treat patients including being authorized prescribers,
working with patients across the age continuum
and in all healthcare settings currently responsible
authorities Under Health Practitioner's Competence Assurance
Act determines standards of education, training
and activities including prescribing
that are covered within the scope of practice.
The college affirms the importance
of maintaining an independent regulatory system
with strong clinical governance to ensure safe competent
practice in all clinical settings.
Almost 50% of nurse practitioners work in primary care
with complex patients.
Many living in rural and remote areas that have limited
or no access to medical practitioners.
Many of their patients are Maori.
An increasing number
of nurse practitioners own their own practice
and many are the sole providers of healthcare
reducing barriers and increasing healthcare access
for communicable patients.
And definitions within the Medicines Act associated
and associated legislation are outdated
and no longer applicable for delivery of accessible
and equitable healthcare.
In post the Global Pandemic
and due to ongoing disruption to supply of some medicines,
section 29 has become a default mechanism
to manage shortages and changes in supply.
This has directly affected nurse practitioner's ability
to prescribe common essential medicines to their patients.
Medicines such as morphine, elixir, oxycodone, ide,
paracetamol vitamin B12 injections
and Softex Eardrops Section 29 is currently a
significant barrier
to nurse practitioners achieving good patient outcomes.
Health resources in alter are to sparse to be squandered
to comply with outdated legislation, worsening access
for already vulnerable populations
and adding needless pressure to our, our workforce,
which creates inefficiency expense and adds to burnout.
There are two issues.
One is replacement of products
and that do not have market authorization in al to Aurora
that are purchased by Pharmac due to supply chain issues
with the authorized product.
The second is the use of unauthorized products.
This might include products that are new or experimental,
but also products
that have not completed market authorization.
The college recommends that the process for genuinely new
and experimental medicines and is separate
and clearly defined, um, to the process
that will be put in place to manage differences
or change of supply chain issues.
This bill proposes a verification pathway
to expedite the process for approval of medications.
The college is supportive of this, um, expediting access
to medicines by reducing the timeframe for approvals,
utilizing other country's decisions on pharmaceuticals
and aligning processes
and reporting standards with international best practice.
However, we also suggest that there may be some risks where
decisions about medicines availability can be affected
by political rather than clinical decision making.
There must be sufficient safeguards to ensure that al
means autonomy and independence in decision making about
what products, what medicines will be made available
to consumers in Alara Section 29 Amendment.
The college is highly supportive of the proposed changes
to the language in section 29
that recognizes nurse practitioner as well
as medical practitioners with the insertion
of all nurse practitioners throughout the, uh,
throughout the document.
This change would remove significant barriers
to timely efficient access to medicines,
particularly in primary health and aged care.
The college strongly supports a proposed new section 29 A,
which provides for the supply
of funded alternative medicines for authorized prescribers
to prescribe and administer them where there is a shortage
of an approved medicine.
In regard to the medicines control committee,
the college supports continuing
to have strong representation from medical practitioners
and pharmacists on the committee.
We propose that in addition to continuing to have medical
and pharmacology experts on the panel,
that consideration is given
to a nurse practitioner also being on the committee.
We hold considerable concerns though about
subsection three A.
If the single criterion for appointment is
that the minister is satisfied
that the person is suitably qualified,
this may not provide sufficient protection to the public
and there may be risk of harm for misclassifying medicines.
We seek clarification on proposal for process of appointment
to members to the committee.
In summary, the college strongly supports the changes
to insert nurse practitioner along medical practitioner
alongside medical practitioners.
In the updated legislation, the College
of Nurses Arturo supports the changes to the legislation
that provides for the supply of alternative funded medicines
for aimed for authorized prescribers
to prescribe and administer them.
Where there is a shortage of an approved medicine,
we support the proposed verification
of medicine's pathway using international comparators.
However, noting that Alberto must have also have a mechanism
to preserve autonomy
and decision making that supports clinical
and not political agendas.
We do not support the minister having to be the only person,
um, who has total control over selecting the members
of the medicines control committee.
And we note that having a nurse practitioner on the MCC may,
um, may provide another useful
perspective in decision making.
Um, thank you for the opportunity for presenting
to you today and um, I'm really happy to take any questions
that any of the members of the committee may wish to ask.
Excellent, thank you. Thank you very much
Kate, uh, for your submission. I should be on.
Thanks for your submission.
Uh, uh, Kate, can you please describe for the committee
from going to the, um, from Polytech on
what is the OR degree on what is the pathway
to becoming a nurse practitioner?
So, um, nurse practitioners, um,
must now hold a master's degree.
So in the current, um,
current process is nurse practitioner must have practiced
for minimum of four years in a clinical specialty.
Um, so they hold quite an extensive range of already
clinical experience on top of their, uh, registered nurse.
So they must be a registered nurse.
They then must go through a master's degree program
and that master's degree, um, has considerable
emphasis on pharmacology and, and pathophysiology.
And the master's degree process is a minimum of two years.
Study full-time. It takes longer than
that quite often for some people.
So from point of registration over registered nurses going
to be at least five years
before a nurse practitioner is able to go, um,
as a novice nurse practitioner
and be supported into entry in the workplace. Thank you.
Thank you very much. All right.
I don't see any other hands.
So, uh, Kate, thank you very much
for your submission today. Great to have you here.
Thank you very much to the committee, uh, members
for your time Kia. Thank you
Kia.
All right, next up we have, uh,
Mark Baldwin joining us today.
Mark, welcome to the health committee. We have you here.
Five minutes, I'll hand it to you now.
Great. Um, I was supposed to be on with Kate,
but I was with a patient.
So, um, yeah.
So I'm here to represent, uh,
nurse practitioners New Zealand.
Um, I was working on the section 29 issue, um, from my time
as chair of NPNZ all the way back in 2014 when nurse
practitioners gained authorized prescribing status the same
as our medical colleagues.
Prior to that, between 2005
and 2014, we had designated prescriber status,
which is the same as the, uh,
prescribing pharmacists have got at the moment.
And we had a Gazette list of medications which
soon became outta date.
Um, international best practice moved on
and you were left with second, third choice medications that
that weren't worth being on the list.
So when it comes to the suggestion that there needs
to be presented list of medications, unapproved medications
that MPS can use, um,
'cause I've read all 193, um, written submissions
and also watch the last health select committee meeting.
Um, also that list would be complete and utter nonsense.
There's no such thing as a low risk drug.
If you look at, um, iron tablets,
if you've got a patient on clozapine,
a drug I use very regularly with my patients that can,
you know, iron tablets can cause constipation.
If you've got a patient who's on clozapine,
they can get clozapine induced gastric hypomobility,
which causes constipation.
So you've got a doubling effect.
You could go even more benign
and look at fiber bulking agents.
Again, I've had GPS prescribed bulking agents
for my patients on clozapine with
cosine induced gastric homo hypomobility
that could also prove fatal.
There's no such thing as a low risk drug.
You need to look at each drug, all the other medications
that people are on, look at the patient,
look at their physical comorbidities.
There's no such thing as a low risk drug.
You have to treat each drug with respect
and you have to treat each patient as an individual in terms
of the evidence, um, that have been presented to you before.
Um, I have grave concerns around, um,
other, um,
submitters saying they know what our education is.
Kate's just outlined that, you know, that it, you've got a,
a bachelor of, um, degree to become a nurse.
Four years post registration training.
You've also got the nurse education to, um,
specialist practice for mental health
and the net P program for the general side,
which is an a, a PG cert.
So they do three years bachelor's degree.
They do a postgrad papers in their first year of practice.
So there's a lot of education that goes on.
Myself personally, I've done the British Association
of Psychopharmacology prescribing master classes.
So we're educated, we know, we know what goes on in terms
of scope of practice.
We're told, you know, our scope
of practice is nurse practitioner.
We have areas of practitioner vocational areas
and we would very much like to work alongside the colleges
medical colleges to upskill ourselves and,
and have access to their training.
But however, our funding for postgraduate education,
we get a third of the money that the SMOs get.
And MPNZ as the professional body doesn't have the funding
to do these courses like the, the medical colleges do.
When I looked at this in 2018, the budget
for Health Workforce New Zealand was $119 million.
113 of that went to medicine, five went to nursing
and the spare change went to Allied Health.
So I understand there are concerns
about our education and training.
We're more than happy to work
with our medical colleagues on that.
And also we'd like to set up our own stuff,
but we need funding for
that, which we don't have at the moment.
And in terms of, you know, the, the suggestion
that if we're given this, we're gonna go crazy and,
and be bringing in novel drugs, that's not the case either.
If you look at all the research that's out there,
nurse practitioner prescribing is very safe
and there is no evidence that we're not safe.
And I see no evidence in any
of the submissions from anyone else
that says these are the research studies.
These are the cases where nurse practitioners have been
unsafe in their practice.
And also just 'cause you've got the right
to do something does not mean so that you will do,
I had a conversation with Dr.
Shane Red in the health Select committee back in 2017
over the um, death certs.
And he said to me as a mental health np,
would you be happy putting
down the cause of death for somebody?
And I said, no more happy than my psychiatrist colleagues
would be 'cause they're not physicians.
'cause you have the right to do something does
not mean to say you will do it.
NPS are very cautious in our practice
'cause we know we have to defend every action that we do.
But I feel that we, we need the full section 29.
'cause if we go for the, the suggestion
of a Gazette low list,
that's just basically keeping the
status quo, but in another name.
So thank you for that time and I'm happy to take questions.
Excellent. Thank you very much.
We are, we're pretty much on time there, Matt.
Well, we are now. Exactly.
So, um, thank you very much for your submission
for presenting to the health committee today.
Cheer.
Okay. Next up we have, uh, Julia Ru
Julia joins us now.
Hi, welcome Julia, welcome to the health committee.
Great to have you here. Um,
Okay. No, it's
Great. Thank you. We're gonna be five minutes.
Okay, well, thank you. And it's wonderful
to see actually some people who I'm, I've sort of know
who you are, like Hamish, who I've chatted with before,
and Alicia Aisha.
Um, so I think that I'm probably,
my submission is probably not the right place, is my guess.
Um, which is that I'm asking for a line change in the,
um, medicines regulations 1984, um,
schedule one line 20 12 1 2 0 7
to have lithium change to lithium carbonate,
which is the way it's prescribed.
Um, but I thought I'd put a submission in any way.
I have also put in a submission
to the medicine reclassification, um,
medicines Classification committee as well to try
to get this sorted around lithium.
I mean, just the background to this is that, um,
lithium at any dose essentially is classified
as a medicine in Al Chia, um, regardless of dose,
even though the dose that's used in the treatment
for bipolar disorder, which is what it's mostly used for,
although it is used for other psychiatric disorders as well,
is that it's a, it starts, it's a starting point
of 250 milligrams.
There's a lot of dietary supplements
that have contained very, very small amounts of lithium, um,
orate in it, like, uh, less than a milligram,
but they cannot be sold in roa, um,
because of the lithium content
and meds safe declares it immediately as a medicine,
regardless of the dose that is being used.
So this is causing a problem be, in my opinion,
I think it's a, an issue for the population in general,
not having access to a dietary supplement that is viewed
as an essential nutrient that we should all be,
um, able to consume.
So that's my, that's why I did the submission, is
that I'm trying to, um, update this, um, this one line
that is in the, um, in the schedule one of the medicines,
uh, regulations 1984.
But I do appreciate that this may not be the way to do it,
but I am trying every way to get this changed.
So I'm open to questions.
Excellent. Thank you. Do any members have questions?
No, uh, in lieu of any hands going up.
Julia, thank you very much for coming along to present
to the health committee today and sharing
Your question. But can
I then, can I ask, uh, Sam then, um, was
that an appropriate submission
or is that something that you won't consider?
I mean, hasn't been ruled out of order, so, um, I mean,
we, we will hear it and, and then we'll consider it further.
Okay. I saw Hamish, Oh,
I just, I was just saying, saying hello.
Um, yeah, and the fact that, uh, we also not,
it's not only just members here,
but it's also the officials that will, that, uh,
will be listening in as well.
Okay. Excellent.
Okay. Thank you very much for your time.
Thanks, Julia.
Okay. Do we have our next one up?
The Pharmaceutical Society of New Zealand?
Yes. Hi there. We are just awaiting our presenter.
We've been asked to just join a bit earlier, so, um,
I know he's just gone into, um, a separate office room
to connect in, so hopefully won't be too far away there.
No worries. No, no.
I know we are running a bit ahead,
ahead of, ahead of schedule.
I got these buffers now schedule
and usually we really need them,
but today our submitters have been so good.
Is that Michael? Is he who you're waiting on?
It's Michael. Yeah. So Michael is, uh, the president
of the Pharmaceutical Society of New Zealand,
Michael Hammond.
And they said, oh, he's joining us now.
I'm Libby McCulloch, uh, one
of the professional practice pharmacists that work in the
practice and policy team there.
So I'm just here to back Michael up,
but it looks like we've made it.
Uh, yeah, so we're a bit early,
so it's good. We're all here.
You're ready to go? Absolutely.
Good afternoon, everybody. Um,
as Libby mentioned, my name is Michael.
I'm the current president and chairman of the board.
Um, and Libby is one
of our fantastic professional practice pharmacists
who holds a lot of expertise,
which is why I've brought her along today.
Um, so firstly, thank you, um, very much for the opportunity
to speak on behalf of the Pharmaceutical Society.
We represent over 3000 members across New Zealand,
pharmacists, technicians, interns, and students.
Um, and so, you know,
bring quite a wide ranging view from that space.
Um, I don't wanna, obviously don't wanna repeat my
submission as I hope you all have read it.
Instead, I'd like to highlight a few key points that were,
um, inside our submission.
Um, first point being that we,
we strongly support the introduction
of the verification pathway.
Um, we do think this will improve efficiencies in patient
access to, um, reach more New Zealanders faster.
Um, and we also recommend that we have a possible funding
considerations occur in parallel with me,
um, approval process.
Uh, we really think
that a coordinated cross-agency approach here could better
ensure the public, um, access to public funded medicines.
Encourage, also encourage pharmaceutical investment in
New Zealand to ensure that this, uh,
verification pathway achieves of goals.
We would, uh, really like the committee to
consider commissioning a review or, and a report
after a, a fixed period of time, uh, for example, two years.
Um, this will allow for an assessment
of the pathways effectiveness
and, you know, determine if we need to make any adjustments
to it and really hope, you know,
make sure we we're achieving what we see out to achieve.
So that's the first, um, point from our submission.
I just wanted to highlight then the, uh, the second one was
regarding, um, prescribing rights.
And so we certainly support, um,
nurse practitioners being able to
prescribe unapproved medicines under Section 29.
Have we also asked that the committee consider to, uh,
explicitly include pharmacists, prescribers in this clause?
Uh, you know, these pharmacists, prescribers,
they go undergo a minimum eight years of study.
Um, and they really are ance experts.
They, um, currently have a very similar prescribe right
to nurse practitioners
and operate, operate very safely within the scope
like mentioned with, with like, with the pathway
and mending the section 29 to include pharmacists,
prescribers would again, improve access
and care to New Zealanders.
So we think it's a really, um, important thing to consider.
Another note on the section 20 nines, which, um, you know,
supports the need for the pathway is that the,
our community pharmacists out there, they're facing the, uh,
supply chain shortages challenges every day.
Um, section 29 medicines was never intended to be something
that addressed supply chain shortages.
However, it has become a bit of a tool for trying
to solve those, those problems.
Um, and so having a faster verification pathway
with appropriate checks
and balances in place, uh, will help ensure
that we are not having to use these, these workarounds.
Um, and then the, the last point that I actually wanted
to make as well was around the proposed changes to the, um,
MCC, and it was more of that we wanted to offer our support
of the fut, uh, working with the MCC in the future, um,
with the hopes of helping increase patients access
to medicines, which was the, um, intention of the bill.
So I've actually run through my points much faster than I,
it, it was in my head.
And so I just wanted to offer opportunity to Libby
as well if she wanted to, um, chip into any of
what I've said there as, um, Libby is a
practicing pharmacist
and has much more of a coalface view than I do at times.
Um, yeah. Thanks Michael.
I'd suppose like to re reiterate your point about, um,
we'd really love to see pharmacists, prescribers included in
that, uh, clause to be able
to prescribe Section 29 medicines.
As Michael said, that, you know, uh,
there's only about a hundred pharmacists,
prescribers currently in New Zealand.
Um, they're often, um, seen as the experts
and they're often called upon
to provide information about the section 29 medicines
before they're prescribed.
Um, these prescribers work in a number
of different important places, which, um, you know,
the majority in GP practices, um, clinics,
um, also hospices.
So having access to be able
to prescribe section 29 29 medicines will improve
that efficiency of having to step to go back to the gp, um,
to re-prescribe a medicine that is suddenly that, you know,
out of stock and there's a section 29
replacement replacement.
Um, so yeah, we'd, we'd be, um, very supportive of
that being included in the, in the clause.
Um, I think going back to the, uh, verification pathway
as Michael said would be, um, we're quite excited
by this pathway because we are faced with daily,
it really is a daily occurrence to see, uh, a number
of section 29 medicines.
And it's difficult for pharmacists when it's, you know,
receive a prescription and it's out of stock, replacing it
with a section 29 medicine.
But obviously the legislation dictates
that it's actually the, you know,
that's the prescriber's responsibility to inform the patient
gain consent, um, under the code of health
and disability services consumers rights, which, you know,
realistically this doesn't happen in today's, um,
situation with all the supply issues.
So we're really hoping that this verification pathway,
if we can get, um, unapproved medicines
approved more quickly, then there'll be less, you know,
issues with, um, with some of the problems
that are being seen out in the community currently.
Um, and I guess the other point we were, um, supportive of
as well was the, uh, exemption for funded alternatives.
So for all prescribers, um, being able to prescribe
what's considered a funded alternative,
which is also still an unapproved medicine,
but funded via phar, um, you, we'd like
to be from a safety perspective, be certain
that all prescribers that are able
to prescribe these medicines are still aware
of their professional responsibilities.
Um, I think there would be some public perception
that if a medicine is funded by Phar, um,
as an alternative medicine, that it's probably been
through some safety process, which obviously it hasn't.
Um, so patients again, need to be fully aware of this, uh,
and to be informed of this.
Um, so that's probably sums up our, our main thoughts
and points, um, with the this amendment.
Um, yeah, so I guess we have any, sorry, Michael, you go.
I was just have to answer any questions.
I do see that, um, Jennifer, you've got your hand up.
Yeah, I dunno if that's us or for somebody else.
No, no thanks. Thanks Michael.
Um, you guys are finished, then we can move on
to questions. Jenny.
Thank you Mr. Chair.
Uh, appreciate your submission, um,
and wanting to have pharmacist prescribers included in
that part two section 11 one.
Um, can you give us a real world example of
what you're seeing in the community?
Can you sort of talk us through what
that would mean in terms of the section 29,
um, medicines that listed there?
Can just sort of walk us through what
that might actually look like in real life.
Libby, would that be one for you as a general
Practice? Yeah, yeah. Yep, absolutely.
So, um, also we're gonna, uh, GP practiced part-time.
Um, and so I do get to see, um, so in a,
probably the most common scenario, uh, uh,
at the moment currently, many of them are the supply issues
where a section 29 medicine is the only option, um,
and a pharmacy legally cannot switch from an approved
medicine to an unapproved medicine for safety reasons.
So currently only a medical practitioner can prescribe a
Section 29 medicine.
So in that situation,
if you've got pharmacists working in a GP practice
or another clinical setting, um, they would then be able
to change that prescription
or prescribe the, uh, section 29 medicine.
Um, it's just, yeah, it would improve efficiency greatly
and save everybody's, um, quite a bit
of time in that sort of setting.
Um, but I guess there are others there,
there are other situations as well where there are just, uh,
aren't funded, sorry, there are funded
but not approved section 29 medicines, um,
where these pharmacists are working in their specialty area,
for example, palliative care,
and they may be needing
to prescribe medicine medicines off license,
or there are section 29 medicines that, um, that hoping
to use for their patients but are unable to prescribe
and then may need to go to their colleague
to ask them to prescribe it.
Um, who may be less familiar with the patient sometimes.
So, um, yeah.
Can I just ask a supplementary on that, Mr. Chair? Yeah.
And that is, um, how often is this occurring?
Um, have you sort of gathered any sort of data on, is it,
you know, several times a day that you're having
to do this or once a week?
Can you just give us an indication of how prevalent is this?
I'm not not aware of any data we have to hand at present,
unless you do Libby from the, the helpline from the calls.
Um, I know pharmacists are encountering in the QE pharmacy
issues of 6, 9, 29 every day.
Um, we could certainly find out from some
of our general practice pharmacist colleagues
how often they are having to
or are encountering this problem.
Um, but nothing that we have readily available.
Yeah, it's a daily occurrence, uh, at the moment
for community pharmacies in particular.
Uh, but you know, this is mainly secondary
to supply issues which nobody sort
of could foresee originally.
Um, and so, you know, we're really faced for patients it's,
sorry, this medicine's out of stock.
We have the section 29 option available.
It's pretty much this is the only choice you have in
in many circumstances.
Um, so it's, yeah, there's a lot of re prescribing going on,
um, but section 29 medicines at the moment,
so it's a saying if the more we can, um,
we get more approved through a safe pathway, um,
that will certainly improve efficiency
and greater access more quickly,
saving a lot of prescribers time.
Thank you very much. Hey, that was very good, Libby.
Michael, thank you for taking the time
to come and present to us today.
We greatly appreciate it.
Thank you. Having us. Nope, thanks everybody.
Okay, next up we have the Consumer Healthcare Products
Association of New Zealand Incorporated.
They're joining us.
Uh, we have Scott Mill who comes to us online now.
Scott, welcome to the health committee.
Very good to have you here for 10 minutes.
I'll hand that time over to you now. Thank you.
Uh, look, thank you very much Mr. Chairman.
It is nice to be back in front of you again.
Uh, our organization, uh, was last in front
of this committee when we talked about, uh, the, uh,
rescheduling of pseudo rine.
Uh, we're now into our second winter.
Uh, your wise council
and decision, uh,
has made available a really useful medicine
to the New Zealand public.
So we thank you for that work. It has worked well.
Um, C-H-P-N-Z Consumer Healthcare Products New Zealand, uh,
is a trade organization that looks
after the, uh,
over the counter medicine suppliers and distributors.
Uh, and we represent, uh, uh, manufacturers,
distributors including, uh, pharmacy, uh, uh, that caters
for about, uh, 90% of the total New Zealand market.
Uh, we do appreciate the opportunity to, uh, discuss,
uh, this bill with you.
Uh, I want to, I wanna say first of all,
that we support the rule of two.
Uh, but, uh, uh, and there's always the,
but, uh, it applies
and will work for prescription medicines.
It will not work, uh, for over the counter medicines.
The rules that me and the,
and the current regulations put around, uh, this proposal,
uh, uh, will not make, uh, for a faster
and more streamlined registration process.
Uh, low risk medicines by, uh, default
and by acknowledgement from medisafe require a
bespoke regulatory pathway.
And we would like to suggest, uh,
and have discussed already this proposal with medisafe,
that a rule of one for low risk medicines, uh,
is appropriate in this way we can get better access to, uh,
uh, safe, effective, and innovative new medicines.
Uh, instead of, uh, relying on old and,
and now somewhat outdated formulations, uh,
from well into the previous century, uh, I will assume
that you've, uh, read, uh, our submission.
It was four pages,
but I want to take you to the last section, uh,
and just go through the summary.
Uh, we, we unfortunately cannot, uh, uh,
agree that the rule of two will improve OTC medicine access
or reduce timeframes.
Um, a
and we believe that the, there should be, uh,
some accommodations within the regulations, uh,
to improve access to over the counter
or lower risk medicines.
And that, uh, there are two, two ways of doing this.
One is the, the, the rule of one, uh, for instance, uh,
medicines that are available on the shelf, uh, should be as,
uh, uh, should be available on the shelf, uh, in Sydney,
uh, as well as Auckland.
Uh, and we really don't see, uh, what the difference is
between an Aussie, uh, swallowing a coffin, cold medication
to a kiwi, uh, in the instance of a low risk medicine.
We also believe that there's an opportunity
for greater harmonization, uh, of labeling
and product, uh, that would, uh,
considerably improve access.
Uh, because the New Zealand market is extremely small, uh,
uh, and often, uh, global companies need
to aggregate both the New Zealand and the Mar
and Australian markets to make them viable
to make a product viable, uh, for public sale.
We've gotta realize there's no cost to government here, uh,
uh, but the, uh, our markets are small
and at the end of a, a long supply chain.
Uh, so harmonization accommodations,
particularly in labeling, uh, will improve, um,
inno innovation and access, uh, to low risk medicines.
Um, we, uh, have done some recent research,
which we are sharing with the minister currently, which goes
to show that, uh, improved access of over-the-counter
medicines can substantially reduce, uh, emergency depart,
uh, department waiting times, uh,
and also the pressure on gp, uh, uh,
GP surgeries.
Uh, there are good medicines available around the world.
And I go back to my initial comment about pseudo rine, uh,
that, that are safe
and effective, uh, that can be dispensed, uh, by pharmacy,
uh, with know, with, uh, with knowledgeable advice attached
to that, uh,
and that we can keep people, um, out of,
uh, GP waiting rooms.
Uh, I just wanna leave time for questions.
So, uh, the only other comment I would make is
that we appreciate the changes
that you are looking at in the
Medicines Classification Committee.
Uh, we agree change is necessary there, uh,
and we think that a consumer component, uh, should be, uh,
made available on that committee,
that there should be a more regular, uh,
more flexible structure and process.
Uh, and, and finally, we just note that the current, uh,
proposals talk about, uh, business days
as opposed to calendar days.
Uh, this, this change needs to be acknowledged in regulation
with regulat, with regulated, uh,
timeframes specified in, uh, in the reg, in the, um,
the regulations, uh, because otherwise both the rule of two
and, and if rule of one was available,
the process would actually be longer.
So, uh, we, we just need to work on,
on the timeframes and the regulations.
Um, but again, I, I, I thank you for, uh, for, uh,
your attentiveness, uh, and look forward to your questions.
Excellent. Uh, thank you very much for your submission.
Uh, Dr. Campbell has his hand up.
Yes. Thank you, Scott. Um,
and Justin, in your written submission, you're advocating
for a ruler one pathway for low risk medications.
What's your definition of, of low risk?
Uh, well, uh, I, I think Dr. Campbell, that ac across the,
uh, the regulators that we align with around the world, uh,
that, uh, that's fairly well established.
So, um, I don't think there's a hard and fast rule.
We would look to the expertise of the other regulators,
the FDA, the, uh, uh, the TGA, um, uh,
the, uh, the, uh, European
and South African Canadian regulators.
Uh, um, you know, different countries have different levels
of restriction.
New Zealand used to be a leader in switch
and making available, uh, more medicines we lead the world
with, with, uh, omeprazole, with sildenafil, uh,
oral contraceptives.
Uh, we've, we've lost that tag at the moment.
We seem to be in a,
in a very conservative mode at the moment.
There are new and innovative medicines available, uh, which,
uh, are more widely available in, in other, uh, um,
jurisdictions, uh, which I would like, uh, to be able
to consider with meds safe.
But I, but I guess in the end, um, Dr.
Kamal, I think we, it's, it's something that we would work
through with meds safe.
We have a good relationship. They're working hard for us.
They're listening, uh, uh,
but we just need to, we need
to make some changes to these rules.
These regulations from 40 years ago are hampering, um,
access to, to, uh, useful low risk medicines.
Thank you very much. Um,
are there any further questions from members?
There appear to be none. So, um,
Thank you, Mr. Chair.
Uh, really appreciate your time.
No, thank you. Appreciate yours. Thank you very much.
Okay, we have, uh, Roche up next.
Welcome, uh, Roche Bons.
Good to Here. We can see a number of you popping up.
So I've got, uh, Aaron, Jonah,
uh, who else we have there?
Nadia, uh, Laura as well. Welcome to the health committee.
I'm Sam Dale, the chair where you have members around.
You'll see them on your screen. We have you for 10 minutes.
Um, you may leave us time for questions if you want,
but I'll hand that time to you now.
Thank you,
Mr. Uh,
members, my sister-in-law again.
Uh, thanks so much for the opportunity to submit to.
I'm Aaron. I'm the governor of B for Rush Pharmaceuticals.
Uh, Russia is a Swiss healthcare company
that focuses on the development of innovative medicines
and therapies, uh, mainly across oncology, immunology,
and infectious diseases and ophthalmology.
Um, as you can see, I'm joined here today by my colleagues,
Joanna War, head of Regulatory Affairs in New Zealand, Nia
naia, regulatory affairs partner and
or c**k healthcare Systems partner here at roosh.
Our public engagement is driven by four core priorities,
improving patient access, strengthening the health system,
accelerating innovation,
and delivering more of those good UN alternates.
And these are the priorities that guide our response
to the medicines amendment for
and support the points made last
week by Medicine New Zealand.
Um, we welcome the bills on 10th
to modernize the regulatory framework
and to speed up access to business.
And we also believe
that there are several amendments which are essential
to ensure that referral delivers on its promise
and practice, especially for patients facing serious illness
or with an unmet clinical need.
Um, I'm sure you've read us written submission.
Um, today we wanted to focus on three key areas
that you believe must to ensure
the bill delivers on its promise.
Firstly, that the eligibility criteria
for verification pathway must be sufficiently broad
to ensure that the bills aims can be secondly appropriate.
Standard timeframes must be included
for regulatory certainty.
And finally, far next processes must be adapted
to the proposed changes to the ture environment, uh,
to ensure that the utility
and the value of the verification pathway we, I'll hand over
to Nadi to talk you through more of that technical detail.
Thank you, Aaron. Um, and thank you Mr.
Chair and committee members for having us here today.
Um, first off, in relation to the verification pathway, one
of the core issues we see is its limited utility due
to overly restrictive eligibility criteria.
The current guidance requires two full sets
of evaluation reports from overseas regulators, which limits
how many medicines can actually benefit from this intended
fast track process.
To give you a bit more detail, there's an increasing trend
for recognized regulators to work together
to review medicines.
As part of well established global collaborative regulatory
frameworks, increased scientific rigor is enabled
through scientific exchange
and sharing of expertise between these regulators
and deficiency is increased by a combination
of work sharing, peer review,
and elimination of duplication.
The regulators collaborate to analyze the scientific data
and generate a set of assessment reports.
Then importantly, each country makes its own decision
to register the medicine according
to its national processes.
However, proposed meds safe guidance will not count
to independent national approvals
resulting from these global frameworks
unless there are two complete sets of assessment reports.
This provision demonstrates a misunderstanding
of modern global regulation
and misses the point that these regulatory frameworks
increase scientific robustness with potentially five
recognized regulators participating in a single
international collaborative pathway.
This creates a real barrier
to finding two eligible overseas approvals for verification
and undermines the goal
of fast tracking essential medicines,
potentially eliminating many
of the medicines the bill aims to expedite.
So firstly, we strongly recommend
that medicines approved via these collaborative
international pathways be procedurally eligible
for the verification route, potentially
by following Health Singapore's lead
that was mentioned in one of the earlier presentations
in requiring two reference approvals,
but only one full set of evaluation reports.
In addition, the bill explicitly excludes medicines
that are approved by provisional
or conditional type approvals.
And these type of approvals are used for medicines
that have the potential based on early clinical data
to be a significant medical advance addressing serious
or life-threatening conditions
with high unmet clinical clinical need.
Excluding these medicines from the pathway means
that the very patients with limited
or no treatment options
who need faster access the most will not benefit from the
verification pathway.
So we also strongly recommend
that the eligibility criteria be modified
to include these vital treatments approved by a provisional
or conditional pathways additional.
Lastly, there's a lack of clarity
around other eligibility criteria such
as whether a medicine needs a separate New Zealand
assessment due to local factors.
This lack of clarity makes it hard for companies
to determine if their application qualifies
and could become a barrier to using the pathway.
We strongly advocate for medicines addressing disease states
that occur with an increased prevalence in New Zealand
specific populations to be eligible.
And with that, I'll hand over to my colleague Nadia.
Thank you Joe, and thank you to the committee
for having us here today for the new verification
pathway to work well.
There needs to be clear and reliable timeframe set in law.
Without them, companies will not have the confidence
to use a new pathway and the potential benefits
of faster approval could be lost.
We recommend setting the following maximum timeframes on the
bill team working days for Medisafe
to check the application is complete.
This is also known
as an application screening period, 20 working days.
The companies to respond to any questions
that meds safe may ask, and 30 days for meds safes
to do the initial review and review of the response, uh,
to the company questions, um, and make their decision.
These are practical timeframes that would help build trust
and efficiency into the system.
Companies take a risk by holding off on their application
to SAF whilst awaiting those two
reference overseas approvals.
Knowing exactly how long the New Zealand review will take
will help reduce the uncertainty.
We're also concerned about proposed changes in the bill
that would slow down other approval timelines
such from using calendar days
to working days would actually make full reviews take
longer, which goes against the aim
of faster decision making.
We strongly oppose this change.
Our final point is around the link
between the mid safe registration
and the Farm Act funding processes.
We believe that the bill may actually have the unintended
consequence of delaying patient access to funded medicines.
Currently, companies can submit their funding applications
to p in parallel
with our meds safe registration submissions.
This also a change implemented
by the current government last year to sped up access
to patients was an improvement that Roche welcomed strongly.
However, by using the verification pathway, this then delays
that far submission process.
We first have to wait around 12 months, potentially longer
before our two reference overseas approvals, and
therefore our FAR submission is also
delayed by the same amount of time.
We recommend a process that allows sponsors
to submit a funding application to, at the point
of submitting a formal intention to file with this ensures
that the funding decisions are progressing as closely
as possible and will align with the regulatory approval
critical for faster access and system efficiency medicines.
New Zealand recently reported
that funding applications are sitting
with P Act for around six years.
Patients don't need additional procedural hurdles
for medicines to reach them without acknowledgement
and commitment of the necessary integration
between the registration and funding process.
The verification pathway is at risk of under utilization
and reduced impact.
We ask the committee to ensure
that FAC is committed to this process change.
In closing, Roach supports the intent of the bill,
but we believe there's imp an improvement, um, to be made,
especially as the bill relates to the eligibility criteria,
absence of the binding timeframes,
and unintentional delays in
that funding decision making process.
Thank you again for allowing us to pre present today,
and we welcome any questions that you may have.
Thank you very much, uh, Roche, for your submission.
Do members have questions?
There appear to be none. So, uh, thank you very much.
It was very good to have you all on here today.
Um, and thank you for being able to jump on earlier as well.
We appreciate it. Thanks Mr. Chair. Thank you too.
Okay, next up we have, uh, compound labs.
I understand we're jumping ahead a little bit.
No, we're not actually, um, jumping backwards.
We have compound labs. Graham, Hogan, uh, joining us.
Graham is coming online now.
Graham, welcome to the health committee.
Very good to have you here.
Um, we have you here for, we have you here.
Um, there's compound labs for 10 minutes
and I will hand that time to you now.
Thank you.
Uh, we're not hearing you.
Sorry, Graham, you may be on mute.
That's all right. We have a bit of time, so it's no rush
Either that Mr.
Chair. He may not have the right audio source selected.
Okay.
We still can't hear you.
Sorry, Graham, but let you play around with it for a bit.
Do we want to, uh, do we have anyone else online, Julia?
And then we could potentially come back to Graham.
We don't at the moment. We don't.
Two submitters left, including Graham.
We're trying to get a hold of the second one,
but we don't have them yet.
Okay. That's all right.
What did you say, Hamish,
that you thought it might be the audio source?
Um, it might be the incorrect audio source.
So just by the audio, the little microphone button,
there's an up arrow, which then you can select microphone.
Does that work at all? That's better.
Wow. Can you hear me? Yes. Brilliant.
You were on. Well done.
That's very frustrating. Apologies for that. Uh, people.
Not at all. Not at all.
So I'll start again. Uh, thanks for the opportunity
to present, uh, to, uh, the, the group here today.
The compound lab supports the bill.
Um, main area of concern relates to section 29 medicines,
and I see there are some reforms in the bill, which we're,
uh, very pleased with.
Um, we as compound labs provide a much needed service
to the public of New Zealand through the provision
of medicines not available across the
counter or normal pharmacy.
These medicines either are in a different delivery method,
so cream, a lozenge, a capsule or liquid instead of a tablet
or a different strengths not available, uh,
across the counter again,
or sometimes not even available in New Zealand.
Uh, or where a non-active medicine, uh, as not a medicine,
uh, may something in the medicine may react for a customer,
which causes them to have a reaction
to the medication they're taking.
Um, so we provide medicines all under scripts from a,
from a specialist, uh, practitioner
and some, uh, nurse, sorry, GP or some nurse practitioners.
Just generally, we provide
around 65,000 medications in a year to well over 12,000
patients, all based on our, uh, section 29 report,
which we have to provide back to the ministry.
So there is a demand for the service that needs fulfilling.
Each of these medicine is somewhat of a unique formulation
and is usually handmade.
So it's not a machine generated thing.
It's very much a person with a mortar and pestle blending
and, um, uh, making the medicines either encapsuled
or or cream form.
Um, under the current, um, uh, re uh,
leg reg regulations
and legislation, we're able to provide a timely delivery
of medication to these patients through the anticipation
of scripts coming through.
And the limit on the size of Medicaid
of batches we can make.
This is all under a standard called the New Zealand
Pharmacy Service standard NZS 8 1 3 4
0.7 20, which was done in 20, uh, 10.
And it provides the rules of what we can compound, uh, with,
uh, limit small bed size up to five liters of a cream
or a liquid, or roughly five kgs of a powder depending on
how much of the actor is involved.
This means we can make sort of a maximum of 250 mil bottles,
um, or 5 5100 M bottles,
or a maximum of a hundred capsule, uh,
bottle capsules at any one time.
Most patches, however, less than this, of
around 12 to 21 units.
Our concern is, well, the bill does not seem
to impact on section 29
and the availability to compound such medications.
The regulatory environment, post passings of the bill needs
to allow for the continuation of the ability
to make an anticipation.
And in that small batch format
that the New Zealand standard I referred to earlier,
provides guidelines for doing so.
The previous, uh, bill was going to make changes.
Uh, so you could not make an anticipation,
which would've had significant impact on the ability
to provide that 67,000, uh, scripts that we would've
provided to people in one year.
And obviously having a significant impact both on the cost
of medicines and the delivery timeframes
for the 12,000 plus patients, doctors, and clinics
and pharmacies that we service.
Just a real quick explanation of what that means.
We have what we call clean rooms.
So small room with a call store type framing,
which we make your medicines in.
Every time you go into that, if you're making one medicine,
it takes a period of time to do so.
If you go in and make a smaller batch, 10 or 12 or 21
or even more, the cost,
the time cost is not significantly bigger than that.
So what we are wanting to make sure is the ability
to make an anticipation still remains under the regulatory
environment, post the passing of the bill, so
that we can make that and provide a fast
and cost effective service to our patients, uh,
who need the medicines.
Um, generally our turnaround time is sort of three
to five days, uh, for products that we have on shelf
and maybe 10 to 14 days for slightly longer for
what we call one-offs.
If we were to move to a different environment,
that timeframe would go out significantly, and the cost
accordingly would make a, have a big impact on,
um, the patient.
So our submission has been based around the desire
to keep the standards that we have in, uh, at moment,
which is post reg, post passing
of the bill in the regulatory environment.
So we can make an anticipation
and provide that speedy turnaround
and cost effective delivery of those medicines
that aren't available through the normal, uh,
pharma register medicine.
So, uh, asking for the committee just to ensure the post,
uh, process of the bill, the regulatory environment,
does enable that process to happen through that provision
of the standard NZS 8 1 3 4 0.7 passed
in 2010.
Thank you. And I happy
to take any questions if there are any.
Thank you, Graham. And do members have questions?
Ham Campbell? Yeah,
So Graham, can I, can I just get it right?
There's nothing currently in the bill that,
uh, you are concerned about.
It's just that post this, this bill passing, you are scared
that, um, there might be o other changes.
Is that correct? Um,
and just noting that the therapeutics product bill
that you mentioned would've prevented this.
Yeah. Uh, the, um, yeah, so
my belief is the devil is always in the detail
and the regulatory environment post enact passing is where
that can get rather complicated.
And a simple observation would be with, uh, um,
therapeutic can, well the cannabis, um, arrangement
where you can't have medicinal cannabis,
but the regulations are quite complex.
We wouldn't want to see a change
to more complexity in this process.
Just the continuation of the regulatory environment,
which we have now, which enables that, uh,
making an anticipation and
therefore batch management under the small limits
that we're allowed to make as a pharmacy license.
All right. Any further questions from members?
There do not appear to be any. So, um,
Thank you very much for the opportunity, uh, people
and, uh, go well with your arduous task.
Thank you very much, Graham,
thank you for joining us today.
Alright, um, who, who do we have next?
Do we have the, do we have, uh,
the Royal Australian College of Physicians?
Or why, why we at a, um, incorporated society here?
We don't have any of the two remaining sub submitters.
All right. Um, we are a bit ahead of schedule, so, um,
I think we can probably just take a 10 minute break, right?
So we'll do that and then we will, um, we'll suspend
and come back at 10 past three.
Thank,
welcome back.
Hopefully we've got a submitter. Now We do.
We've got, um, Issa from
Incorporated Society.
Good to have you on. Um, there. Hi. Welcome.
Uh, we have you with the health committee for 10 minutes.
Um, you can use that time as you wish.
If you wanna leave us some times for time for questions,
you may, but I will hand that to you now. Thank you.
Can you hear me okay? We've got you. Yep.
Great. Ah, well, um, ua,
my name's J Panto and I'm the chief person for waa.
Um, thank you for the opportunity to speak on behalf of waa,
um, to you today.
Uh, we submit in strong opposition
to the Medicines Amendment bill.
As it stands. Uh, we acknowledge that the Bill's intent
to improve access to medicines for New Zealanders.
However, what we see is a piece of legislation that again,
fails, undermines,
and puts our whanau at risk on relying on a system
that was never designed, uh, with us
or for us, uh,
by adopting overseas pharmaceutical approvals.
This b this Bill RI risks causing more harm
to our communities, um, on the verification pathway,
uh, we believe it's a fast track to inequity.
So this bill proposes that medicines approved
by two recognized overseas jurisdictions can automatically
be verified in alua.
Well, we can't, we cannot support this.
Uh, these foreign regulators do not consider Maori health
realities, cultural
or historical overmedication of our people.
Um, most overseas agencies lack indigenous
representational safeguards By importing approvals
wholesale, we risk importing bias, harm and exclusion.
This is not efficiency,
it's outsourcing responsibility
without treaty accountability.
Where is the role of Tua in deciding
what medicines are safe, appropriate,
and aligned with Maori models of health
on expanding the prescription rights
without cultural safety?
I mean, that's risky. Uh,
we've heard other submitters today, uh,
voice the safety of that.
Uh, we acknowledge and support
and principle, uh, the intention
to allow more health professionals like midwives,
pharmacists, nurse practitioners,
and others to prescribe, substitute, uh, medication,
but expanding prescribers rights without
requiring cultural safety training knowledge of tikanga
and the understanding of UA copa Maori models.
Wha whakapapa based care risk deepening the inequities Maori
already face in the health system.
Empowerment without education is dangerous.
It will not lead to equity
unless prescribers are prepared to serve Maori
with humility, insight,
and competency on reforming the Medicines.
Clarification Committee. Yes,
modernizing committee membership sounds like progress,
but the bill does not guarantee Maori representation.
There's no inclusion of MAGA Maori, no voice
for traditional healing and no requirement
to center Maori led research.
Um, without, without Titi based governance,
this reform is cosmetic only.
We'll reject any change that continues
to exclude our knowledge, our maga, uh, experience, uh,
expertise, sorry, and, and our authority.
Uh, our recommendation is for a, uh,
for a ity compliant pathway forward.
Uh, Waga offers these key recommendations, uh,
ity based governance, uh, embedded co-governance with Maori
and all approvals, distribution
and classification processes, reject the fast track clause.
Do not allow approvals to bypass our systems
unless assessed through a co-designed, uh, process,
mandatory Maori health competency.
We require. We are asking to require, um,
cultural safety training for all prescribers
and regulators, recognition of, uh, ua maga, Maori
guarantee, Maori representation.
Ensure Maori with clinical, cultural
and kopa Maori expertise have full decision making roles,
not just advisory input.
This bill may seek speed, but equity must come first.
We remind the crown that t is not an aspiration,
it's not aspirational, it's constitutional.
Unless Maori are partners in design, governance
and operation of health systems, including this bill,
we will continue to see legislation that marginalizes us
opposes this bill in its current form.
And we call for a full revision
and general partnership with Maori.
That's me.
Excellent. Thank you very much for your submission.
Do members have questions? Hamish?
Yes. Hi. Thank, thank you for your submission.
Um, so this is for, um, approvals
of pharmaceutical, um, agents.
Is, is there any that you think that you know of
that you would be unhappy to be approved
because they may increase, um, inequities?
I can't speak, uh, I can't speak medically
because, um, I'm not a medical professional.
I'll just disclose that now.
Um, but,
but what I can tell you is that I live in the realities
of our communities.
So I, I can't list a a, if you're asking me
to list a medication that I think will prohibit or,
or cause, um, inequity, no, I can't answer that
Or any, any classes of medication which may,
No, I can't 'cause I'm not a medical professional.
Thank you. Well, what I'm asking for really is just,
um, is, is,
is to, is the challenges that we face as Maori.
I think that Maori need to be at the head
of the decision making.
That's, that's what my submission is about,
not specifically, uh, any type
of drug or medicine.
Thank you. Thank you very much.
Um, do other members have questions?
If not, thank you very much. Um,
Thank you again for the opportunity.
Yeah, thank you Kda.
Alright, um, that brings us on to
going very fast, our final submission, which is from,
um, the Royal Australian College of Physicians.
We have, uh, Yuk and Matt joining us. Welcome.
We have, we have you both here, which is fantastic.
Uh, we have you for 10 minutes.
I'm Sam now chair of the committee.
You'll see other members there on the screen.
Um, you may leave us some time for questions if you wish,
but I'll pass that time to you now.
Thank you.
Thank you. Hello, my name's uh, Jan, act Za.
I'm the Art New Zealand President-Elect.
Uh, and it's the Australasian College of Physicians,
both Australia and New Zealand.
Uh, so we have about 4,000 members who are physicians
and pediatricians.
And so we care for the community across, uh,
I'm a a frontline nephrologist, I'm a kidney doctor.
Uh, I work at White matter and I'm also an academic looking
after training of medical students.
Uh, and so I'm really grateful for this opportunity
to present in front of the, uh, health Select Committee.
Uh, overall the RACP are supportive of a number
of measures outlined in the medicines amendment bill.
Um, however, we do have some concerns.
Uh, so in particular I'd like to say that, uh,
we support the medicines verification pathway
as this will speed up access to therapeutic agents.
Um, I'm a nephrologist.
I care for patients who develop kidney failure.
One of the largest groups of patients who we deal
with are patients
with autosomal dominant polycystic kidney disease.
And about 10% of patients who develop kidney failure, uh,
is due to this autosomal dominant condition,
meaning if your parents have it,
you've got a 50% chance of getting it.
A drug which can slow this down
as a medication called tolvaptan that was registered
for use in 2013 in Japan, 2015 in the European Union,
2017 in Australia.
However, despite being Medisafe registered in New Zealand in
2019, it didn't become available until 2022.
So I do support, um, uh, the, the, uh, the medicines, uh,
verification pathway.
Um, I think however, the committee should consider access
to medications, uh, in the broader context.
Um, so prescribing medications is not simply one of just,
uh, writing a prescription and dispensing medicines.
Uh, there can also be significant reduced access due
to limited to access to physicians and other prescribers.
And, uh, whether those are doctors or nurse prescribers
or pharmacists, there's a chronic medical
workforce shortage.
So to go back to that medication tolvaptan, uh,
we've looked at the prescribing of that drug
and there's almost a 10% variation across the country, uh,
uh, related to equity of access to, uh, health prescribers.
Um, these drugs,
although it's great to have access to them,
also need coordinated care.
Uh, and there's a significant workforce shortage, uh,
as demand for medical specialists as continued
to grow across the system.
When you think about the Artero
and New Zealand system, uh, we have far fewer, uh,
doctors per head of population.
So to put that in context, we've got 73 physicians
for every a hundred thousand pe uh, people.
And you compare that to Australia,
which has greater than a hundred, uh,
physicians per a hundred thousand population.
And there's significant, uh, equity access.
So less than one 1%
of our physicians work in rural communities.
Uh, and we think when we think of the Maori
and Pacific workforce, Maori doctors represent less than 5%,
uh, um, of the medical workforce with Pacific doctors,
only 2.2% of the workforce.
So it's really important to consider this
bill in the context of, uh, sustainable workload.
Uh, currently I can tell you
that there are many doctors leaving
the public health system.
Um, I can tell you that, um,
my colleagues are leaving due to burnout.
We want to provide good care.
The government recognizes that we need an additional three
and a half thousand doctors over the next nine years,
but we need a clear pathway to achieving that goal.
And the college would welcome working with the government
and key stakeholders on these critical issues.
Now, as I highlighted, we do have some concerns around, uh,
the risk, uh, the prescribing of expand, uh,
unapproved medications.
And I'd like to hand over to my colleague, uh, Matt Duke,
uh, to address that issue.
Morena. Um, I'm Matthew Duke.
So I'm the ASCAP New Zealand secretary,
and I work as a specialist physician in clinical
pharmacology and general medicine and Christchurch Hospital.
And I'm a member of the Department
of Medicine at the University of Otago,
where I teach in research clinical pharmacology.
So clinical pharmacology, um,
is the medical specialty about using use of medicines.
Uh, so we are supportive of a number
of the meds outlined in the, in the bill,
including the new medicines verification pathway.
However, concerns about the proposed expansion
of prescribing unapproved medicines using Section 29
and the concept of funded alternative medicines.
Uh, so the, I mean these are medicines
and it's really how do we ensure they're fit for use
by our patients and our families.
Uh, so when you are dispensed to medicine, you want
to be confident's true to label
and not substandard or counterfeit.
Uh, so section 20 nines intended
for exceptional circumstances like rare,
one-off unusual cases.
In these cases, the prescribers
responsible for the quality of the product.
That's true to label. And when we're purchasing medicines
and bulk for the country, it's important they go
through the regulatory approval process.
So the quality can be determined, um,
with Section 29 bypasses this
and it makes me another prescribers responsible
for the quality of the medicine, which is a fiction
'cause it's not happening now and is not possible.
Uh, so medicines,
the point point medicines require regulatory approval
process as well as funding.
Uh, so section 20 of medicines act
for new medicines section two approval's not possible.
Uh, then section 23 appears better
suited for such circumstances.
So section 23 allows provisional consent
for the applied medicines for the minister is
of the opinion that's desirable.
And so first really asking, please,
can we have medicines not funded?
Alternative medicines, uh, which sort of bypasses that, uh,
check on quality is counterfeit
and substandard medicines do exist.
Um, the issues we're discussing as Gen X outlined, uh,
symptoms of deeper problems of access to healthcare,
but in also quality of healthcare.
Um, one of the constraints of this is we prescribe,
define prescribing as one thing.
Uh, but it's not. So our definition works if your course
of an antibiotic from your gp, but our patients now,
and even some of us,
are on several long-term medicines managed
by multidisciplinary teams.
So ensuring both access to care
and quality care requires a new definition for prescribing,
which I realize is beyond the scope of this bill.
But I think it's very important for the new, uh,
medical products, uh, bill that's be coming up soon.
Uh, so starting a new medicine
for an newly diagnosed conditions different to renewal
or supply for ongoing care, it's different
to renewing response to treatment
and making decisions to change al doses
and different to decisions to stop long-term medicines.
But these are all different definitions, limited
by a definition of prescribing
for the healthcare's a team gain.
But our current conditions imply it's all about
the individual practitioner.
The self care service and role of teams are key
to decisions rather than which individual practitioner
signed that particular order.
Uh, so the medicines from patients I discharged from
hospital today and whom we're admitting today were decided,
but no between team
and patient with lots of people involved.
The prescription was written by a junior doctor on behalf
of the team, but the decisions had input from many people.
And the team leader, I have responsibility,
but it's not my name on there,
it's the junior doctor's name on there
who might not be involved tomorrow
and then following up is very difficult.
Um, but I think that's the broader issue.
But the particular issue raising today is the use
of section 29, uh, which we have concerns about.
And this new idea of a funded alternative medicine, um,
I want my patients, my family to be careful with medicines
and uh, if we are funding them, uh, let's evaluate them
and approve them, not, uh, bypass that process.
And if they're not fit for approval,
we might need another solution.
Um, so thank you for the opportunity to, you know, discuss
and raise those points and um, we are happy
to answer any questions
Do he is on mute.
Um, thank you very much for your submission.
We've got a couple of minutes, Asha, I assume.
Yeah, thanks very much.
And um, it's taken me a while to understand
that this is a area that very few
of the other submissions have have touched on.
So I just want to really clarify
that I've understood the concerns correctly.
Um, you are totally correct to say
that in when we currently prescribe under section 29, uh,
the prescriber cannot verify the quality of the, uh,
medicine and it is meant
to be an individualized use for that patient.
But, um, uh, it is the case
that there have long been a number of medicines
that we use under Section 29 routinely.
So I'm thinking of every time I prescribed for tuberculosis,
I had to use an unregistered medicine, Ethan Butyl.
So it seems some of the submitters have said
that this type of prescribing is becoming more common
because of supply chain, uh, disruptions.
And can you explain
how the risk is worse than the status quo with the, um,
uh, with funded, um, with
clause nine of the new bill?
Yep. So currently, so the status quo is
that Medisafe will look at the quality of the product
and traceability through the supply manufacturing and things
and what happens there, uh,
with pharma just doing purchasing,
someone's doing a purchase
and it's not clear who's responsible to check that it is
what it says on the label.
Yes, we've got some exceptions
and as you say, Ethan Butyl,
which I've got a patient on today, um,
is not approved in New Zealand.
And really we want to have pathways
to have more approval of such things.
Now those are still relatively exception,
but this now use of, okay, we haven't got a current brand of
whatever medicine you might choose, say, uh, uh,
amoxicillin, um,
we are getting another brand from somewhere else.
Okay, it's coming in and, but we bring it under Section 29.
Who's checking it is what it says it on the label,
that it's not counterfeit,
that it does meet the quality standards.
That's not clear.
And under Section 29, if it's a single patient, then yes,
a specialist team can take that process and follow through
and they're purchasing it usually from a, you know,
an international supplier for a one-off case.
But if we're bringing things in bulk, no,
a purchasing person in Farm Act making a decision, oh,
we have to get this brand, we can get them, oh,
it's approved, this is a product from this country.
It's not clear who, who's responsible
and where is happening for actually what's the quality of
that product that's coming in.
Uh, whereas, you know, meds Safe does that
for the approved medicines.
So can we have an approval process rather than bypassing the
approval process and then having this new funded alternative
medicines, which um, seems to bypass regulation.
Right? So because you're totally right that, um, uh,
section 29 medicines are purchased
and paid for by by Pharmac, they, um, uh,
there is a requirement on meds safe to do some level
of check on the supply chain, um, supply chain for those,
though it is not the same standard as an approval.
Yeah. Thank you.
Sorry. Thank you.
Are there any other, um, comments
or questions there for members?
Oh, well I could think of a another one.
Um, so, so the, um, so that you've,
you've raised a really important point for the committee
to take into account.
Um, I guess proponents of this change might say, um,
you know, it's a reality.
These supply chain disruptions are happening all the time.
We need to make sure medicines are, um,
available for people.
Uh, and this only happens if prescribers are willing
to take on the risk.
How, how should the committee weigh weigh that?
Um, uh, pros and cons of that, that up? Um,
To comment on that further.
So if I'm prescribing at the moment,
I don't know if it's gonna be dispensed
the approved or unapproved product.
I can't have a conversation with the patient.
So I mean, I guess I'd be suggesting that section 23
with an approval process, whatever that might be
for those medicines that we are purchasing in bulk
through phar should be undertaken
and very clear where that responsibility
and accountability lies rather, and for patients as well.
So how can I have a meaningful conversation
with a patient about their medicine if,
I don't know if it's gonna be section 29
or section 20, which I don't right now.
Yeah. Thank you.
Okay, sorry. Thank you Matt
and Jannik, uh, very good to have you here.
Thank you for taking the time to present
to the committee today and answer some questions.
Fantastic.
You Thank you.
Alright, committee, um, don't run away,
we'll jump off this public session
and we'll move into the private One very quickly, we've got,
um, one piece to consider there.